
[Enter Leonato, his brother, his wife, Hero his daughter, and]


[Beatrice his neece, and a kinsman.]

Leonato. Was not counte Iohn here at supper?

brother. I saw him not.

Beatrice. How tartely that gentleman lookes, I neuer can see
him but I am heart-burn'd an hower after.

Hero. He is of a very melancholy disposition.

Beatrice. He were an excellent man that were made iust in
the mid-way between him and Benedick, the one is too like an
image and saies nothing, and the other too like my ladies eldest
sonne, euermore tatling.

Leonato. Then halfe signior Benedickes tongue in Counte
Iohns mouth, and halfe Counte Iohns melancholy in Signior
Benedickes face.

Beatrice. With a good legge and a good foote vnckle, and
money inough in his purse, such a man would winne any wo
man in the world if a could get her good will.

Leonato. By my troth neece thou wilt neuer get thee a hus
band, if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.

brother. Infaith shees too curst.

Beatrice. Too curst is more then curst, I shall lessen
B3 Gods
Much adoe
Gods sending that way, for it is saide, God sends a curst cow
short hornes, but to a cow too curst, he sends none.

Leonato. So, by being too curst, God will send you no
hornes.

Beatrice. Iust, if he send me no husband, for the which bles
sing, I am at him vpon my knees euery morning and euening:
Lord, I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face, I
had rather lie in the woollen!

Leonato. You may light on a husband that hath no beard.

Beatrice. What should I do with him, dresse him in my ap
parell and make him my waiting gentlewoman? he that hath a
beard, is more then a youth: and he that hath no beard, is lesse
then a man: and he that is more then a youth, is not for me, and
he that is lesse then a man, I am not for him, therefore I will
euen take sixpence in earnest of the Berrord, and leade his
apes into hell.

Leonato. Well then, go you into hell.

Beatrice. No but to the gate, and there will the diuell meete
me like an old cuckold with hornes on his head, and say, get
you to heauen Beatrice, get you to heauen, heeres no place for
you maids, so deliuer I vp my apes and away to saint Peter: for
the heauens, he shewes me where the Batchellers sit, and there
liue we as mery as the day is long.

brother. Well neece, I trust you will be rulde by your fa
ther.

Beatrice. Yes faith, it is my cosens duetie to make cursie and
say, father, as it please you: but yet for all that cosin, let him be a
handsome fellow, or else make an other cursie, and say, father,
as it please me.

Leonato. Well neece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a
husband.

Beatrice. Not til God make men of some other mettal then
earth, would it not grieue a woman to be ouer-masterd with
a peece of valiant dust? to make an account of her life to a clod
of waiward marle? no vnckle, ile none: Adams sonnes are my
brethren, and truely I holde it a sinne to match in my kin
red.
Leonato
about Nothing.

Leonato. Daughter, remember what I told you, if the prince
do solicite you in that kind, you know your answer.

Beatrice. The fault will be in the musique cosin, if you be
not wooed in good time: if the prince be too important, tell
him there is measure in euery thing, and so daunce out the an
swer, for here me Hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting, is
as a Scotch ijgge, a measure, and a cinquepace: the first suite is
hot and hasty like a Scotch ijgge (and ful as fantasticall) the
wedding manerly modest (as a measure) full of state and aun
chentry, and then comes Repentance, and with his bad legs
falls into the cinquepace faster and faster, til he sincke into his
graue.

Leonato. Cosin you apprehend passing shrewdly.

Beatrice. I haue a good eie vnckle, I can see a church by
day-light.

Leonato. The reuellers are entring brother, make good
roome.

[Enter prince, Pedro, Claudio, and Benedicke, and Balthaser,]


[or dumb Iohn.]

Pedro. Lady will you walke about with your friend?

Hero. So, you walke softly, and looke sweetly, and say no
thing, I am yours for the walke, and especially when I walk a
way.

Pedro. With me in your company.

Hero. I may say so when I please.

Pedro. And when please you to say so?

Hero. When I like your fauour, for God defend the lute
should be like the case.

Pedro. My visor is Philemons roofe, within the house is
Ioue.

Hero. Why then your visor should be thatcht.

Pedro. Speake low if you speake loue.

Bene. Well, I would you did like me.

Mar. So would not I for your owne sake, for I haue ma
ny ill qualities.

Bene. Which is one?

Mar. I say my praiers alowd.
B4 Bene.
Much adoe

Bene. I loue you the better, the hearers may cry Amen.

Marg. God match me with a good dauncer.

Balth. Amen.

Marg. And God keepe him out of my sight when the
daunce is done: answer Clarke.

Balth. No more words, the Clarke is answered.

Vrs. ula I know you well enough, you are signior Antho
nio.

Antho. At a word I am not.

Vrs. ula I knowe you by the wagling of your head.

Antho. To tell you true, I counterfeit him.

Vrs. ula You coulde neuer doe him so ill well, vnlesse you
were the very man: heeres his drie hand vp and downe, you
are he, you are he.

Antho. At a word, I am not.

Vrs. ula Come, come, do you thinke I do not know you by
your excellent wit? can vertue hide it selfe? go to, mumme, you
are he, graces will appeere, and theres an end.

Beat. Will you not tell me who tolde you so?

Bened. No, you shall pardon me.

Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you are?

Bened. Not now.

Beat. That I was disdainefull, and that I had my good wit
out of the hundred mery tales: wel, this was signior Benedick
that said so.

Bened. Whats he?

Beat. I am sure you know him well enough.

Bened. Not I, beleeue me.

Beat. Did he neuer make you laugh?

Bened. I pray you what is he?

Beat. Why he is the princes ieaster, a very dul fool, only his
gift is, in deuising impossible slaunders, none but Libertines
delight in him, and the commendation is not in his wit, but in
his villanie, for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
they laugh at him, and beate him: I am sure he is in the Fleete,
I would he had boorded me.

Bene. When I know the Gentleman, ile tell him what you
say.
Beat.
about Nothing.

Beat. Do, do, heele but break a comparison or two on me,
which peraduẽture, (not markt, or not laught at) strikes him in
to melancholy, and then theres a partrige wing saued, for the
foole will eate no supper that night: wee must follow the lea
ders.

Bene. In euery good thing.

Beat. Nay, if they leade to any ill, I will leaue them at the
next turning. Dance exeunt

Iohn. Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath with
drawne her father to breake with him about it: the Ladies fo
low her, and but one visor remaines.

Borachio. And that is Claudio, I knowe him by his bear
ing.

Iohn. Are not you signior Benedicke?

Clau. You know me well, I am he.

Iohn. Signior, you are very neere my brother in his loue, he
is enamourd on Hero, I pray you disswade him from her, she
is no equall for his birth, you may doe the parte of an honest
man in it.

Claudio. How know you he loues her?

Iohn. I heard him sweare his affection.

Borac. So did I too, and he swore hee would marry her to
night.

Iohn. Come let vs to the banquet.

[exeunt: manet Clau.]

Claud. Thus answer I in name of Benedicke,
But heare these ill newes with the eares of Claudio:
Tis certaine so, the Prince wooes for himselfe,
Friendship is constant in all other things,
Saue in the office and affaires of loue:
Therefore all hearts in loue vse their owne tongues.
Let euery eie negotiate for it selfe,
And trust no Agent: for Beauty is a witch,
Against whose charmes, faith melteth into blood:
This is an accident of hourely proofe,
Which I mistrusted not: farewel therefore Hero.

[Enter Bene ( dicke]

Benedicke. Count Claudio.

Claudio. Yea, the same.
C Bene.
Much adoe

Bene. Come, will you go with me?

Claudio. Whither?

Bene. Euen to the next willow, about your owne busines,
county: what fashion will you weare the garland of? about
your necke, like an Vsurers chaine? or vnder your arme, like a
Lieutenants scarffe? you must weare it one way, for the prince
hath got your Hero.

Claudio. I wish him ioy of her.

Bened. Why thats spoken like an honest Drouier, so they
sell bullockes: but did you thinke the Prince would haue ser
ued you thus?

Claudio. I pray you leaue me.

Benedicke. Ho now you strike like the blindman, twas the
boy that stole your meate, and youle beate the post.

Claudio. If it will not be, ile leaue you. exit

Benedicke. Alas poore hurt foule, now will hee creepe into
sedges: but that my Ladie Beatrice should know me, and not
know mee: the princes foole! hah, it may be I goe vnder that
title because I am merry: yea but so I am apte to doe my selfe
wrong: I am not so reputed, it is the base (though bitter) dispo
sition of Beatrice, that puts the world into her person, and so
giues me out: well, ile be reuenged as I may.

[Enter the Prince, Hero, Leonato, Iohn and Borachio,]


[and Conrade.]

Pedro. Now signior, wheres the Counte, did you see him?

Benedicke. Troth my lord, I haue played the part of Ladie
Fame, I found him heere as melancholy as a Lodge in a War
ren, I tolde him, and I thinke I tolde him true, that your grace
had got the goodwil of this yoong Lady, and I offred him my
company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as be
ing forsaken, or to binde him vp a rod, as being worthie to bee
whipt.

Pedro. To be whipt, whats his fault?

Benedicke. The flatte transgression of a Schoole-boy, who
being ouer-ioyed with finding a birds nest, shewes it his com
panion, and he steales it.

Pedro. Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? the transgres
sion
about Nothing.
sion is in the stealer.

Benedicke. Yet it had not beene amisse the rodde had beene
made, & the garland too, for the garland he might haue worn
himselfe, and the rodde he might haue bestowed on you, who
(as I take it) haue stolne his birds nest.

Pedro. I wil but teach them to sing, and restore them to the
owner.

Benedicke. If their singing answer your saying, by my faith
you say honestly.

Pedro. The ladie Beatrice hath a quarrell to you, the Gen
tleman that daunst with her, told her shee is much wrongd by
you.

Bened. O shee misusde me past the indurance of a blocke:
an oake but with one greene leafe on it, would haue answered
her: my very visor beganne to assume life, and scold with her:
she tolde me, not thinking I had beene my selfe, that I was the
Princes iester, that I was duller than a great thawe, huddleing
iest vpon iest, with such impossible conueiance vpon me, that
I stoode like a man at a marke, with a whole army shooting
at me: she speakes poynyards, and euery word stabbes: if her
breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no liu
ing neere her, shee would infect to the north starre: I woulde
not marry her, though shee were indowed with al that Adam
had left him before he transgrest, she would haue made Her
cules haue turnd spit, yea, and haue cleft his club to make the
fire too: come, talke not of her, you shall find her the infernall
Ate in good apparell, I would to God some scholler woulde
coniure her, for certainely, while she is heere, a man may liue
as quiet in hell, as in a sanctuarie, and people sinne vpon pur
pose, because they would goe thither, so indeede all disquiet,
horrour, and perturbation followes her.

[Enter Claudio and Beatrice.]

Pedro. Looke heere she comes.

Benedicke. Will your grace command me any seruice to the
worldes end? I will go on the slightest arrand now to the An
typodes that you can deuise to send mee on: I will fetch you a
tooth-picker now from the furthest inch of Asia: bring you
C2 the
Much adoe
the length of Prester Iohns foot: fetch you a haire off the great
Chams beard: doe you any embassage to the Pigmies, rather
than holde three words conference, with this harpy, you haue
no imployment for me?

Pedro. None, but to desire your good company.

Benedicke. O God sir, heeres a dish I loue not, I cannot in
dure my Ladie Tongue. exit.

Pedro. Come Lady, come, you haue lost the heart of signi
or Benedicke.

Beatrice. Indeed my Lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gaue
him vse for it, a double heart for his single one, mary once be
fore he wonne it of me, with false dice, therefore your grace
may well say I haue lost it.

Pedro. You haue put him downe Lady, you haue put him
downe.

Beatrice. So I would not he should do me, my Lord, lest I
should prooue the mother of fooles: I haue brought Counte
Claudio, whom you sent me to seeke.

Pedro. Why how now Counte, wherefore are you sad?

Claudio. Not sad my Lord.

Pedro. How then? sicke?

Claudio. Neither, my Lord.

Beatrice. The Counte is neither sad, nor sicke, nor merry,
nor well: but ciuill Counte, ciuil as an orange, and something
of that iealous complexion.

Pedro. Ifaith Lady, I think your blazon to be true, though
ile be sworne, if he be so, his conceit is false: heere Claudio, I
haue wooed in thy name, and faire Hero is won, I haue broke
with her father, and his good will obtained, name the day of
marriage, and God giue thee ioy.

Leonato. Counte take of me my daughter, and with her my
fortunes: his grace hath made the match, and all grace say A
men to it.

Beatrice. Speake Counte, tis your Qu.

Claudio. Silence is the perfectest
Herault of ioy, I were but
little happy if I could say, how much? Lady, as you are mine,
I am yours, I giue away my selfe for you, and doate vpon the
exchange.
Beatr.
about Nothing.

Beat. Speake cosin, or (if you cannot) stop his mouth with a
kisse, and let not him speake neither.

Pedro. Infaith lady you haue a merry heart.

Beatr. Yea my lord I thanke it, poore foole it keepes on the
windy side of Care, my coosin tells him in his eare that he is in
her heart

Clau. And so she doth coosin.

Beat. Good Lord for aliance: thus goes euery one to the
world but I, and I am sun-burnt, I may sit in a corner and crie,
heigh ho for a husband.

Pedro. Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.

Beat. I would rather haue one of your fathers getting: hath
your grace ne're a brother like you? your father got excellent
husbands if a maide coulde come by them.

Prince. Will you haue me? lady.

Beatr. No my lord, vnles I might haue another for work
ing-daies, your grace is too costly to weare euery day: but I
beseech your grace pardon me, I was born to speake all mirth,
and no matter.

Prince. Your silence most offends me, and to be merry, best
becomes you, for out a question, you were borne in a merry
hower.

Beatr. No sure my lord, my mother cried, but then there
was a starre daunst, and vnder that was I borne, cosins God
giue you ioy.

Leonato. Neece, will you looke to those things I tolde you
of?

Beat. I crie you mercy vncle, by your graces pardon.

[exit Beatrice.]

Prince. By my troth a pleasant spirited lady.

Leon. Theres little of the melancholy element in her my
lord, she is neuer sad, but when she sleeps, & not euer sad then:
for I haue heard my daughter say, she hath often dreampt of
vnhappines, and wakt her selfe with laughing.

Pedro. She cannot indure to heare tell of a husband.

Leonato. O by no meanes, she mockes al her wooers out of
sute.
C3 Prince
Much adoe

Prince. She were an excellent wife for Benedick.

Leonato. O Lord, my lord, if they were but a weeke married,
they would talke themselues madde.

Prince. Countie Claudio, when meane you to goe to
church?

Clau. To morow my lord, Time goes on crutches, til Loue
haue all his rites.

Leonato. Not til monday, my deare sonne, which is hence a
iust seuennight, and a time too briefe too, to haue al things an
swer my mind.

Prince. Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing,
but I warrant thee Claudio, the time shall not go dully by vs, I
wil in the interim, vndertake one of Hercules labors, which is,
to bring Signior Benedick and the lady Beatrice into a moun
taine of affection, th'one with th'other, I would faine haue it a
match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but
minister such assistance as I shall giue you direction.

Leonato. My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights
watchings.

Claud. And I my Lord.

Prince. And you too gentle Hero?

Hero. I wil do any modest office, my lord, to help my cosin
to a good husband.

Prince. And Benedicke is not the vnhopefullest husband
that I know: thus farre can I praise him, he is of a noble strain,
of approoued valour, and confirmde honesty, I will teach you
how to humour your cosin, that she shall fal in loue with Be
nedicke, and I, with your two helpes, wil so practise on Bene
dicke, that in dispight of his quicke wit, and his queasie sto
macke, he shall fall in loue with Beatrice: if we can do this, Cu
pid is no longer an Archer, his glory shall bee ours, for we are
the onely loue-gods, goe in with mee, and I will tell you my
drift. exit.

[Enter Benedicke alone.]

Bene. Boy.

Boy. Signior.

Bene. In my chamber window lies a booke, bring it hither
to me in the orchard.

Boy. I am here already sir. exit.

Bene. I know that, but I would haue thee hence and here a
gaine. I do much wonder, that one man seeing how much an
other man is a foole, when he dedicates his behauiours to loue,
wil after he hath laught at such shallow follies in others, becom
the argument of his owne scorne, by falling in loue, and such a
man is Claudio, I haue knowne when there was no musique
with him but the drumme and the fife, and now had he rather
heare the taber and the pipe: I haue knowne when he would
haue walkt ten mile afoot, to see a good armour, and now wil
he lie ten nights awake caruing the fashion of a new dublet: he
was woont to speake plaine, and to the purpose (like an honest
man and a souldier) and now is he turnd ortography, his words
are a very fantasticall banquet, iust so many strange dishes:
may I be so conuerted and see with these eies? I cannot tell, I
thinke not: I wil not be sworne but loue may transforme me to
an oyster, but ile take my oath on it, till he haue made and oy
ster of me, he shall neuer make me such a foole: one woman is
faire, yet I am well, an other is wise, yet I am well: an other
vertuous, yet I am wel: but till all graces be in one woman, one
womã shal not com in my grace: rich she shal be thats certain,
wise, or ile none, vertuous, or ile neuer cheapen her: faire, or ile
neuer looke on her, mild, or come not neare me, noble, or not I
for an angell, of good discourse, an excellent musitian, and her
haire
about Nothing.
haire shall be of what colour it please God. hah! the prince and
monsieur Loue, I wil hide me in the arbor.

[Enter prince, Leonato, Claudio, Musicke.]

Prince. Come shall we heare this musique?

Claud. Yea my good lord: how stil the euening is,
As husht on purpose to grace harmonie!

Prince. See you where Benedicke hath hid himselfe?

Claud. O very wel my lord: the musique ended,
Weele fit the kid-foxe with a penny worth.

[Enter Balthaser with musicke.]

Prince. Come Balthaser, weele heare that song againe.

Balth. O good my lord, taxe not so bad a voice,
To slaunder musicke any more then once.

Prince. It is the witnesse still of excellencie,
To put a strange face on his owne perfection,
I pray thee sing, and let me wooe no more.

Balth. Because you talke of wooing I will sing,
Since many a wooer doth commence his sute,
To her he thinkes not worthy, yet he wooes,
Yet will he sweare he loues.

Prince. Nay pray thee come,
Or if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.

Balth. Note this before my notes,
Theres not a note of mine thats worth the noting.

Prince. Why these are very crotchets that he speakes,
Note notes forsooth, and nothing.

Bene. Now diuine aire, now is his soule rauisht, is it not
strange that sheepes guts should hale soules out of mens bo
dies? well a horne for my mony when alls done.

[The Song.]

Sigh no more ladies, sigh no more,
Men were deceiuers euer,
One foote in sea, and one on shore,
To one thing constant neuer,
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blith and bonnie,
D1 Con-
Much adoe
Conuerting all your soundes of woe,
Into hey nony nony.
Sing no more ditties, sing no moe,
Of dumps so dull and heauy,
The fraud of men was euer so,
Since summer first was leauy,
Then sigh not so, &c.
Prince. By my troth a good song.

Balth. And an ill singer my lord.

Prince. Ha, no no faith, thou singst wel enough for a shift.

Ben. And he had bin a dog that should haue howld thus,
they would haue hangd him, and I pray God his bad voice
bode no mischeefe, I had as liue haue heard the night-rauen,
come what plague could haue come after it.

Prince. Yea mary, doost thou heare Balthasar? I pray thee
get vs some excellent musique: for to morow night we would
haue it at the ladie Heroes chamber window.

Balth. The best I can my lord.

[Exit Balthasar.]

Prince. Do so, farewell. Come hither Leonato, what was
it you told mee of to day, that your niece Beatrice was in loue
with signior Benedicke?

Cla. O I, stalke on, stalk on, the foule sits. I did neuer think
that lady would haue loued any man.

Leo. No nor I neither, but most wonderful, that she should
so dote on signior Benedicke, whome she hath in all outward
behauiors seemd euer to abhorre.

Bene. Ist possible? sits the wind in that corner?

Leo. By my troth my Lord, I cannot tell what to thinke of
it, but that she loues him with an inraged affection, it is past the
infinite of thought.

Prince. May be she doth but counterfeit.

Claud. Faith like enough.

Leon. O God! counterfeit? there was neuer counterfeit of
passion, came so neare the life of passion as she discouers it.
Prince
about Nothing.

Prince. Why what effects of passion shewes she?

Claud. Baite the hooke wel, this fish will bite.

Leon. What effects my Lord? she wil sit you, you heard my
daughter tell you how.

Claud. She did indeede.

Prince. How, how I pray you! you amaze me, I would haue
thought her spirite had beene inuincible against all assaults of
affection.

Leo. I would haue sworn it had, my lord, especially against
Benedicke.

Bene. I should think this a gull, but that the white bearded
fellow speakes it: knauery cannot sure hide himself in such re
uerence.

Claud. He hath tane th'infection, hold it vp.

Prince. Hath shee made her affection knowne to Bene
dicke?

Leonato. No, and sweares shee neuer will, thats her tor
ment.

Claudio. Tis true indeed, so your daughter saies: shall I, saies
she, that haue so oft encountred him with scorne, write to him
that I loue him?

Leo. This saies she now when she is beginning to write to
him, for sheel be vp twenty times a night, and there will she sit
in her smocke, til she haue writ a sheete of paper: my daughter
tels vs all.

Clau. Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a prety
iest your daughter told of vs.

Leonato. O when she had writ it, and was reading it ouer, she
found Benedicke and Beatrice betweene the sheete.

Claudio. That.

Leon. O she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence, raild
at her self, that she should be so immodest to write, to one that
she knew would flout her, I measure him, saies she, by my own
spirit, for I should flout him, if he writ to me, yea thogh I loue
him I should.

Clau. Then downe vpon her knees she falls, weepes, sobs,
beates her heart, teares her haire, prayes, curses, O sweet Bene
D2 dicke,
Much adoe
dicke, God giue me patience.

Leonato. She doth indeed, my daughter saies so, and the ex
tasie hath so much ouerborne her, that my daughter is some
time afeard shee will doe a desperate out-rage to her selfe, it is
very true.

Prince. It were good that Benedicke knew of it by some o
ther, if she will not discouer it.

Claudio. To what end: he would make but a sport of it, and
torment the poore Lady worse.

Prince. And he should, it were an almes to hang him, shees
an excellent sweete lady, and (out of all suspition,) she is vertu
ous.

Claudio. And she is exceeding wise.

Prince. In euery thing but in louing Benedicke.

Leonato. O my Lord, wisedome and blood combating in
so tender a body, we haue ten proofes to one, that bloud hath
the victory, I am sory for her, as I haue iust cause, beeing her
vncle, and her gardian.

Prince. I would shee had bestowed this dotage on mee, I
would haue daft all other respects, and made her halfe my self:
I pray you tell Benedicke of it, and heare what a will say.

Leonato. Were it good thinke you?

Claudio. Hero thinkes surely she will die, for she sayes shee
will die, if he loue her not, and shee will die ere shee make her
loue knowne, and she will die if he wooe her, rather than shee
will bate one breath of her accustomed crosnesse.

Prince. She doth well, if shee shoulde make tender of her
loue, tis very possible heele scorne it, for the man (as you know
all) hath a contemptible spirite.

Claudio. He is a very proper man.

Prince. He hath indeede a good outward happines.

Claudio. Before God, and in my mind, very wise.

Prince. Hee dooth indeede shew some sparkes that are like
wit.

Claudio. And I take him to be valiant.

Prince. As Hector, I assure you, and in the mannaging of
quarrels you may say he is wise, for either hee auoydes them
with
about Nothing.
with great discretion, or vndertakes them with a most christi
anlike feare.

Leonato. If he do feare God, a must necessarily keep peace,
if hee breake the peace, hee ought to enter into a quarrel with
feare and trembling.

Prince. And so will hee doe, for the man doth feare God,
howsoeuer it seemes not in him, by some large iestes hee will
make: well I am sory for your niece, shall we go seeke Bene
dicke, and tell him of her loue?

Claudio. Neuer tell him, my Lord, let her weare it out with
good counsell.

Leonato. Nay thats impossible, shee may weare her heart
out first.

Prince. Well, we will heare further of it by your daughter,
let it coole the while, I loue Benedicke wel, and I could wish
he would modestly examine himselfe, to see how much he is
vnworthy so good a lady.

Leonato. My lord, will you walke? dinner is ready.

Claudio. If he do not doate on her vppon this, I will neuer
trust my expectation.

Prince. Let there be the same nette spread for her, and that
must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry: the sporte
will be, when they holde one an opinion of an others dotage,
and no such matter, thats the scene that I woulde see, which
wil be meerely a dumbe shew: let vs send her to call him in to
dinner.

Benedicke. This can be no tricke, the conference was sadly
borne, they haue the trueth of this from Hero, they seeme to
pittie the Lady: it seemes her affections haue their full bent:
loue me? why it must be requited: I heare how I am censurde,
they say I will beare my selfe prowdly, if I perceiue the loue
come from her: they say too, that she will rather die than giue
anie signe of affection: I did neuer thinke to marry, I must
not seeme prowd, happy are they that heare their detractions,
and can put them to mending: they say the Lady is faire, tis a
trueth, I can beare them witnesse: and vertuous, tis so, I can
not reprooue it, and wise, but for louing me, by my troth it is
D3 no
Much adoe
no addition to her wit, nor no great argument of her follie, for
I will be horribly in loue with her, I may chaunce haue some
odde quirkes and remnants of witte broken on me, because I
haue railed so long against marriage: but doth not the appe
tite alter? a man loues the meate in his youth, that he cannot in
dure in his age. Shall quippes and sentences, and these paper
bullets of the brain awe a man from the carreere of his humor?
No, the world must be peopled. When I saide I woulde die a
batcheller, I did not think I should liue til I were married, here
comes Beatrice: by this day, shees a faire lady, I doe spie some
markes of loue in her.

[Enter Beatrice.]

Beatr. Aganst my will I am sent to bid you come in to din
ner.

Bene. Faire Beatrice, I thanke you for your paines.

Beat. I tooke no more paines for those thankes, then you
take paines to thanke me, if it had bin painful I would not haue
come.

Bene. You take pleasure then in the message.

Beat. Yea iust so much as you may take vppon a kniues
point, and choake a daw withall: you haue no stomach signior,
fare you well. exit.

Bene. Ha, against my will I am sent to bid you come in to
dinner: theres a double meaning in that: I took no more paines
for those thanks thẽ you took pains to thank me, thats as much
as to say, any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks: if I do
not take pitty of her I am a villaine, if I do not loue her I am a
Iew, I will go get her picture,

[exit.]


[Enter Hero and two Gentlewomen, Margaret, and Vrsley.]

Hero. Good Margaret runne thee to the parlour,
There shalt thou find my cosin Beatrice,
Proposing with the prince and Claudio,
Whisper her eare and tell her I and Vrsley,
Walke in the orchard, and our whole discourse
Is all of her, say that thou ouer-heardst vs,
And bid her steale into the pleached bowere
Where hony-suckles ripened by the sunne,
Forbid
about Nothing.
Forbid the sunne to enter: like fauourites,
Made proud by princes, that aduaunce their pride,
Against that power that bred it, there will she hide her,
To listen our propose, this is thy office,
Beare thee well in it, and leaue vs alone.

Marg. Ile make her come I warrant you presently.

Hero. Now Vrsula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley vp and downe,
Our talke must onely be of Benedicke,
When I do name him let it be thy part,
To praise him more than euer man did merite,
My talke to thee must be how Benedicke,
Is sicke in loue with Beatrice: of this matter,
Is little Cupids crafty arrow made,
That onely wounds by heare-say: now begin,
For looke where Beatrice like a Lapwing runs
Close by the ground, to heare our conference.

[Enter Beatrice.]

Vrs. ula The pleasantst angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden ores the siluer streame,
And greedily deuoure the treacherous baite:
So angle we for Beatrice, who euen now,
Is couched in the wood-bine couerture,
Feare you not my part of the dialogue.

Hero. Then go we neare her that her eare loose nothing,
Of the false sweete baite that we lay for it:
No truly Vrsula, she is too disdainfull,
I know her spirits are as coy and wild,
As haggerds of the rocke.

Vrs. ula But are you sure,
That Benedicke loues Beatrice so intirely?

Hero. So saies the prince, and my new trothed Lord.

Vrs. ula And did they bid you tel her of it, madame?

Hero. They did intreate me to acquaint her of it,
But I perswaded them, if they lou'de Benedicke,
To wish him wrastle with affection,
And neuer to let Beatrice know of it.
Vrsula
Much adoe

Vrs. ula Why did you so, dooth not the gentleman
Deserue as full as fortunate a bed,
As euer Beatrice shall couch vpon?

Hero. O God of loue! I know he doth deserue,
As much as may be yeelded to a man:
But nature neuer framde a womans hart,
Of prowder stuffe then that of Beatrice:
Disdaine and Scorne ride sparkling in her eies,
Misprising what they looke on, and her wit
Valewes it selfe so highly, that to her
All matter els seemes weake: she cannot loue,
Nor take no shape nor proiect of affection,
She is so selfe indeared.

Vrs. ula Sure I thinke so,
And therefore certainely it were not good,
She knew his loue lest sheele make sport at it.

Hero. Why you speake truth, I neuer yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, yong, how rarely featured.
But she would spel him backward: if faire faced,
She would sweare the gentleman should be her sister:
If blacke, why Nature drawing of an antique,
Made a foule blot: if tall, a launce ill headed:
If low, an agot very vildly cut:
If speaking, why a vane blowne with all winds:
If silent, why a blocke moued with none:
So turnes she euery man the wrong side out,
And neuer giues to Truth and Vertue, that
Which simplenesse and merite purchaseth.

Vrs. ula Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.

Hero. No not to be so odde, and from all fashions,
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable,
But who dare tell her so? if I should speake,
She would mocke me into ayre, O she would laugh me
Out of my selfe, presse me to death with wit,
Therefore let Benedicke like couerd fire,
Consume away in sighes, waste inwardly:
It were a better death, then die with mockes,
Which
about Nothing.
Which is as bad as die with tickling.

Vrs. ula Yet tel her of it, heare what she wil say.

Hero. No rather I will go to Benedicke,
And counsaile him to fight against his passion,
And truly ile deuise some honest slaunders,
To staine my cosin with, one doth not know,
How much an ill word may impoison liking.

Vrs. ula O do not do your cosin such a wrong,
She cannot be so much without true iudgement,
Hauing so swift and excellent a wit,
As she is prisde to haue, as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as signior Benedicke.

Hero. He is the onely man of Italy,
Alwaies excepted my deare Claudio

Vrs. ula I pray you be not angry with me, madame,
Speaking my fancy: signior Benedicke,
For shape, for bearing argument and valour,
Goes formost in report through Italy.

Hero. Indeed he hath an excellent good name.

Vrs. ula His excellence did earne it, ere he had it:
When are you married madame?

Hero. Why euery day to morrow, come go in,
Ile shew thee some attyres, and haue thy counsaile,
Which is the best to furnish me to morrow.

Vrs. ula Shees limed I warrant you,
We haue caught her madame.

Hero. If it proue so, then louing goes by haps,
Some Cupid kills with arrowes some with traps.

Beat. What fire is in mine eares? can this be true?
Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorne so much?
Contempt, farewel, and maiden pride, adew,
No glory liues behind the backe of such.
And Benedicke, loue on I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy louing hand:
If thou dost loue, my kindnesse shall incite thee
To bind our loues vp in a holy band.
For others say thou dost deserue, and I
E Beleeue
Much adoe
Beleeue it better then reportingly.

[exit.]


[Enter Prince, Bastard, Leonato, Frier, Claudio, Bene]


[dicke, Hero, and Beatrice]

Leonato. Come Frier Francis, be briefe, onely to the plaine
forme of marriage, and you shall recount their particular due
ties afterwards.

Fran. You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady.

Claudio. No.

Leo. To bee married to her: Frier, you come to marry her.

Frier. Lady, you come hither to be married to this counte.

Hero. I do.

Frier. If either of you know any inward impediment why
F3 you
Much adoe
you should not be conioyned, I charge you on your soules to
vtter it.

Claudio. Know you any, Hero?

Hero. None my lord.

Frier. Know you any, Counte?

Leonato. I dare make his answer, None.

Clau. O what men dare do! what men may do! what men
daily do, not knowing what they do!

Bene. Howe nowe! interiections? why then, some be of
laughing, as, ah, ha, he.

Claudio. Stand thee by Frier, father by your leaue,
Will you with free and vnconstrained soule
Giue me this maide your daughter?

Leonata. As freely sonne as God did giue her mee.

Claudio. And what haue I to giue you backe whose woorth
May counterpoise this rich and pretious gift?

Princn. Nothing, vnlesse you render her againe.

Claudio. Sweete Prince, you learne me noble thankfulnes:
There Leonato, take her backe againe,
Giue not this rotten orenge to your friend,
Shee's but the signe and semblance of her honor:
Behold how like a maide she blushes heere!
O what authoritie and shew of truth
Can cunning sinne couer it selfe withall!
Comes not that blood, as modest euidence,
To witnesse simple Vertue? would you not sweare
All you that see her, that she were a maide,
By these exterior shewes? But she is none:
She knowes the heate of a luxurious bed:
Her blush is guiltinesse, not modestie.

Leonato. What do you meane, my lord?

Claudio. Not to be married,
Not to knit my soule to an approoued wanton.

Leonato. Deere my lord, if you in your owne proofe,
Haue vanquisht the resistance of her youth,
And made defeate of her virginitie.

Claudio. I know what you would say: if I haue knowne her,
You
about Nothing.
You will say, she did imbrace me as a husband,
And so extenuate the forehand sinne: No Leonato,
I neuer tempted her with word too large,
But as a brother to his sister, shewed
Bashfull sinceritie, and comelie loue.

Hero. And seemde I euer otherwise to you?

Claudio. Out on thee seeming. I wil write against it,
You seeme to me as Diane in her Orbe,
As chaste as is the budde ere it be blowne:
But you are more intemperate in your blood,
Than Venus, or those pampred animalls,
That rage in sauage sensualitie.

Hero. Is my Lord well that he doth speake so wide?

Leonato. Sweete prince, why speake not you?

Prince. What should I speake?
I stand dishonourd that haue gone about,
To lincke my deare friend to a common stale.

Leonato. Are these things spoken, or do I but dreame?

Bas. tard Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.

Bened. This lookes not like a nuptiall.

Hero. True, O God!

Claud. Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the prince? is this the princes brother?
Is this face Heroes? are our eies our owne?

Leonato. All this is so, but what of this my Lord?

Claud. Let me but moue one question to your daughter,
And by that fatherly and kindly power,
That you haue in her, bid her answer truly.

Leonato. I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.

Hero. O God defend me how am I beset,
What kind of catechising call you this?

Claud. To make you answer truly to your name.

Hero. Is it not Hero, who can blot that name
With any iust reproch?

Claud. Mary that can Hero,
Hero it selfe can blot out Heroes vertue.
What man was he talkt with you yesternight,
Out at your window betwixt twelue and one?
Now
Much adoe
Now if you are a maide, answer to this.

Hero. I talkt with no man at that hower my lord.

Prince. Why then are you no maiden. Leonato,
I am sory you must heare: vpon mine honor,
My selfe, my brother, and this grieued Counte
Did see her, heare her, at that howre last night,
Talke with a ruffian at her chamber window,
Who hath indeede most like a liberall villaine,
Confest the vile encounters they haue had
A thousand times in secret.

Iohn. Fie, fie, they are not to be named my lord,
Not to be spoke of,
There is not chastitie enough in language,
Without offence to vtter them: thus pretty lady,
I am sory for thy much misgouernement.

Claud. O Hero! what a Hero hadst thou bin,
If halfe thy outward graces had bin placed,
About thy thoughts and counsailes of thy heart?
But fare thee well, most foule, most faire, farewell
Thou pure impietie, and impious puritie,
For thee ile locke vp all the gates of Loue,
And on my eie-liddes shall Coniecture hang,
To turne all beautie into thoughts of harme,
And neuer shall it more be gracious.

Leonato. Hath no mans dagger here a point for me.

Beatrice. Why how now cosin, wherfore sinke you down?

Bast. ard Come let vs go: these things come thus to light,
Smother her spirits vp.

Benedicke. How doth the Lady?

Beatrice. Dead I thinke, help vncle,
Hero, why Hero, vncle, signior Benedicke, Frier.

Leonato. O Fate! take not away thy heauy hand,
Death is the fairest couer for her shame
That may be wisht for.

Beatrice. How now cosin Hero?

Frier. Haue comfort lady.

Leonato. Dost thou looke vp?
Frier
about Nothing.

Frier. Yea, wherefore should she not?

Leonato. Wherfore? why doth not euery earthly thing,
Cry shame vpon her? could she here deny
The story that is printed in her bloud?
Do not liue Hero, do not ope thine eies:
For did I thinke thou wouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirites were stronger than thy shames,
My selfe would on the rereward of reproches
Strike at thy life. Grieued I I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugall Natures frame?
O one too much by thee: why had I one?
Why euer wast thou louely in my eies?
Why had I not with charitable hand,
Tooke vp a beggars issue at my gates,
Who smirched thus, and mired with infamy,
I might haue said, no part of it is mine,
This shame deriues it selfe from vnknowne loynes,
But mine and mine I loued, and mine I praisde,
And mine that I was prowd on mine so much,
That I my selfe, was to my selfe not mine:
Valewing of her, why she, O she is falne,
Into a pit of incke, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her cleane againe,
And salt too little, which may season giue
To her foule tainted flesh.

Ben. Sir, sir, be patient, for my part I am so attired in won
der, I know not what to say.

Beat. O on my soule my cosin is belied.

Bene. Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?

Beat. No truly, not although vntill last night,
I haue this tweluemonth bin her bedfellow.

Leon. Confirmd, confirmd, O that is stronger made,
Which was before bard vp with ribs of yron,
Would the two princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loued her so, that speaking of her foulenesse,
Washt it with teares! hence from her, let her die.

Frier. Heare me a little, for I haue only bin silent so long, &
giuen way vnto this course of fortune, by noting of the lady, I
haue markt,
G A
Much adoe
A thousand blushing apparitions,
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames,
In angel whitenesse beate away those blushes,
And in her eie there hath appeard a fire,
To burne the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth: call me a foole,
Trust not my reading, nor my obseruations,
Which with experimental seale doth warrant
The tenure of my booke: trust not my age,
My reuerence, calling, nor diuinitie,
If this sweete ladie lie not guiltlesse here,
Vnder some biting errour.

Leonato. Frier, it cannot be,
Thou seest that al the grace that she hath left,
Is, that she will not adde to her damnation,
A sinne of periury, she not denies it:
Why seekst thou then to couer with excuse,
That which appeares in proper nakednesse?

Frier. Lady, what man is he you are accusde of?

Hero. They know that do accuse me, I know none,
If I know more of any man aliue
Then that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sinnes lacke mercie, O my father,
Proue you that any man with me conuerst,
At houres vnmeete, or that I yesternight
Maintaind the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death.

Frier. There is some strange misprision in the princes.

Bene. Two of them haue the very bent of honour,
And if their wisedomes be misled in this,
The practise of it liues in Iohn the Bastard,
Whose spirites toyle in frame of villanies.

Leonato. I know not, if they speake but truth of her,
These hands shall teare her, if they wrong her honour,
The prowdest of them shal wel heare of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this bloud of mine,
Nor age so eate vp my inuention,
Nor
about Nothing.
Nor Fortune made such hauocke of my meanes,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find awakte in such a kind,
Both strength of limbe, and policy of mind,
Ability in meanes, and choise of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.

Frier. Pawse awhile,
And let my counsell sway you in this case,
Your daughter here the princesse (left for dead,)
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it, that she is dead indeede,
Maintaine a mourning ostentation,
And on your families old monument,
Hang mourneful epitaphes, and do all rites,
That appertaine vnto a buriall.

Leon. What shall become of this? what will this do?

Frier. Mary this well caried, shall on her behalfe,
Change slaunder to remorse, that is some good,
But not for that dreame I on this strange course,
But on this trauaile looke for greater birth:
She dying, as it must be so maintaind,
Vpon the instant that she was accusde,
Shal be lamented, pittied, and excusde
Of euery hearer: for it so falls out,
That what we haue, we prize not to the worth,
Whiles we enioy it, but being lackt and lost,
Why then we racke the valew, then we find
The vertue that possession would not shew vs
Whiles it was ours, so will it fare with Claudio:
When hee shall heare she died vpon his words,
Th Idaea of her life shall sweetly creepe,
Into his study of imagination,
And euery louely Organ of her life,
Shall come apparelld in more precious habite,
More moouing delicate, and full of life,
Into the eie and prospect of his soule
Then when she liude indeed: then shall he mourne,
G2 If
Much adoe
If euer loue had interest in his liuer,
And wish he had not so accused her:
No, though he thought his accusation true:
Let this be so, and doubt not but successe
Will fashion the euent in better shape,
Then I can lay it downe in likelihood.
But if all ayme but this be leuelld false,
The supposition of the ladies death,
Will quench the wonder of her infamie.
And if it sort not wel, you may conceale her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusiue and religious life,
Out of all eies, tongues, minds, and iniuries.

Bene. Signior Leonato, let the Frier aduise you,
And though you know my inwardnesse and loue
Is very much vnto the prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honor, I will deale in this,
As secretly and iustly as your soule
Should with your body.

Leon. Being that I flow in griefe,
The smallest twine may leade me.

Frier. Tis wel consented, presently away,
For to strange sores, strangely they straine the cure,
Come lady, die to liue, this wedding day
Perhaps is but prolong'd, haue patience and endure.

[exit.]

Bene. Lady Beatrice, haue you wept al this while?

Beat. Yea, and I will weep a while longer.

Bene. I will not desire that.

Beat. You haue no reason, I do it freely.

Bene. Surely I do beleeue your faire cosin is wronged.

Beat. Ah, how much might the man deserue of me that
would right her!

Bene. Is there any way to shew such friendship?

Beat. A very euen way, but no such friend.

Bene. May a man do it?

Beat. It is a mans office, but not yours.

Bene. I doe loue nothing in the worlde so well as you,
is
about Nothing.
is not that strange?

Beat. As strange as the thing I knowe not, it were as possi
ble for me to say, I loued nothing so wel as you, but beleue me
not, and yet I lie not, I confesse nothing, nor I deny nothing, I
am sory for my coosin.

Bened. By my sword Beatrice, thou louest me.

Beat. Do not sweare and eate it.

Bened. I will sweare by it that you loue me, and I wil make
him eate it that sayes I loue not you.

Beat. Will you not eate your word?

Bened. With no sawce that can be deuised to it, I protest I
loue thee.

Beat. Why then God forgiue me.

Bened. VVhat offence sweete Beatrice?

Beat. You haue stayed me in a happy houre, I was about
to protest I loued you.

Bened. And do it with all thy heart.

Beat. I loue you with so much of my heart, that none is left
to protest.

Bened. Come bid me doe any thing for thee.

Beat. Kill Claudio.

Bened. Ha, not for the wide world.

Beat. You kill me to deny it, farewell.

Bened. Tarry sweete Beatrice.

Beat. I am gone, though I am here, there is no loue in you,
nay I pray you let me go.

Bened. Beatrice.

Beat. In faith I will go.

Bened. VVeele be friends first.

Beat. You dare easier be friends with mee, than fight with
mine enemy.

Bened. Is Claudio thine enemy?

Beat. Is a not approoued in the height a villaine, that hath
slaundered, scorned, dishonored my kinswoman? O that I
were a man! what, beare her in hand, vntill they come to take
handes, and then with publike accusation vncouerd slaunder,
vnmittigated rancour? O God that I were a man! I woulde
G3 eate
Much adoe
eate his heart in the market place.

Bened. Heare me Beatrice.

Beat. Talke with a man out at a window, a proper saying.

Bened. Nay but Beatrice.

Beat. Sweete Hero, she is wrongd, she is slaundred, shee is
vndone.

Bened. Beat?

Beat. Princes and Counties! surely a princely testimonie, a
goodly Counte, Counte Comfect, a sweete Gallant surely, O
that I were a man for his sake! or that I had any friend woulde
be a man for my sake! But manhoode is melted into cursies,
valour into complement, and men are only turnd into tongue,
and trim ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules, that only
tels a lie, and sweares it: I cannot be a man with wishing, ther
fore I will die a woman with grieuing.

Bened. Tarry good Beatrice, by this hand I loue thee.

Beatrice. Vse it for my loue some other way than swearing
by it.

Bened. Thinke you in your soule the Count Claudio hath
wrongd Hero?

Beatrice. Yea, as sure as I haue a thought, or a soule.

Bened. Enough, I am engagde, I will challenge him, I will
kisse your hand, and so I leaue you: by this hand, Claudio shal
render me a deere account: as you heare of me, so think of me:
goe comforte your coosin, I must say she is dead, and so fare
well.

[Enter Leonato and his brother.]

Brother. If you go on thus, you will kill your selfe,
And tis not wisedome thus to second griefe,
Against your selfe.

Leonato. I pray thee cease thy counsaile,
Which falles into mine eares as profitlesse,
As water in a syue: giue not me counsaile,
Nor
Nor let no comforter delight mine eare,
But such a one whose wrongs doe sute with mine.
Bring me a father that so lou'd his child,
Whose ioy of her is ouer-whelmd like mine,
And bid him speake of patience,
Measure his woe the length and bredth of mine,
And let it answer euery straine for straine,
As thus for thus, and such a griefe for such,
In euery lineament, branch, shape, and forme:
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
And sorrow, wagge, crie hem, when he should grone,
Patch griefe with prouerbes, make misfortune drunke,
With candle-wasters: bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience:
But there is no such man, for brother, men
Can counsaile, and speake comfort to that griefe,
Which they themselues not feele, but tasting it,
Their counsaile turnes to passion, which before,
Would giue preceptiall medcine to rage,
Fetter strong madnesse in a silken thred,
Charme ach with ayre, and agony with words,
No, no, tis all mens office, to speake patience
To those that wring vnder the loade of sorrow
But no mans vertue nor sufficiencie
To be so morall, when he shall endure
The like himselfe: therefore giue me no counsaile,
My griefes crie lowder then aduertisement.

Brother. Therein do men from children nothing differ.

Leonato. I pray thee peace, I wil be flesh and bloud,
For there was neuer yet Philosopher,
That could endure the tooth-ake patiently,
How euer they haue writ the stile of gods,
And made a push at chance and sufferance.

Brother. Yet bend not all the harme vpon your selfe,
Make those that do offend you, suffer too.

Leonato. There thou speakst reason, nay I will do so,
My soule doth tell me, Hero is belied,
H And
Much adoe
And that shall Claudio know, so shall the prince,
And all of them that thus dishonour her.

[Enter Prince and Claudio.]

Brother. Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.

Prince. Good den, good den.

Claudio. Good day to both of you.

Leonato. Heare you my Lords?

Prince. We haue some haste Leonato.

Leonato. Some haste my lord! well, fare you well my lord,
Are you so hasty now? wel, all is one.

Prince. Nay do not quarrel with vs, good old man.

Brother. If he could right himselfe with quarrelling,
Some of vs would lie low.

Claudio. Who wrongs him?

Leona. Mary thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou:
Nay, neuer lay thy hand vpon thy sword,
I feare thee not.

Claudio. Mary beshrew my hand,
If it should giue your age such cause of feare,
Infaith my hand meant nothing to my sword.

Leonato. Tush, tush man, neuer fleere and iest at me,
I speake not like a dotard, nor a foole,
As vnder priuiledge of age to bragge,
What I haue done being yong, or what would doe,
Were I not old, know Claudio to thy head,
Thou hast so wrongd mine innocent child and me,
That I am forst to lay my reuerence by,
And with grey haires and bruise of many daies,
Do challenge thee to triall of a man,
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child.
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors:
O in a toomb where neuer scandal slept,
Saue this of hers, framde by thy villanie.

Claudio. My villany?

Leonato. Thine Claudio, thine I say.

Prince. You say not right old man.
Leonato
about Nothing.

Leonato. My Lord, my Lord,
Ile prooue it on his body if he dare,
Dispight his nice fence, and his actiue practise,
His Maie of youth, and bloome of lustihood.

Claudio. Away, I will not haue to doe with you.

Leonato. Canst thou so daffe me? thou hast kild my child,
If thou kilst me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.

Brother. He shal kill two of vs, and men indeed,
But thats no matter, let him kill one first:
Win me and weare me, let him answer me,
Come follow me boy, come sir boy, come follow me
Sir boy, ile whip you from your foyning fence,
Nay, as I am a gentleman I, will.

Leonato. Brother.

Brother. Content your self, God knowes, I loued my neece,
And she is dead, slanderd to death by villaines,
That dare as well answer a man indeed.
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue,
Boyes, apes, braggarts, Iackes, milke-sops.

Leonato. Brother Anthony.

Brother. Hold you content, what man! I know them, yea
And what they weigh, euen to the vtmost scruple,
Scambling out-facing, fashion-monging boies,
That lie, and cogge, and flout, depraue, and slaunder,
Go antiquely, and shew outward hidiousnesse,
And speake of halfe a dozen dang'rous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,
And this is all.

Leonato. But brother Anthonie.

Brother. Come tis no matter,
Do not you meddle, let me deale in this.

Prince. Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience,
My heart is sory for your daughters death:
But on my honour she was chargde with nothing
But what was true, and very full of proofe.

Leonato. My Lord, my Lord.

Prince. I will not heare you.
H2 Leonato
Much adoe

Leo. No come brother, away, I wil be heard. Exeunt amb.

Bro. And shal, or some of vs wil smart for it. Enter Ben.

Prince. See see, heere comes the man we went to seeke.

Claud. Now signior, what newes?

Bened. Good day my Lord:

Prince. Welcome signior, you are almost come to parte al
most a fray.

Claud. Wee had likt to haue had our two noses snapt off
with two old men without teeth.

Prince. Leonato and his brother what thinkst thou? had we
fought, I doubt we should haue beene too yong for them.

Bened. In a false quarrell there is no true valour, I came to
seeke you both.

Claud. We haue beene vp and downe to seeke thee, for we
are high proofe melancholie, and would faine haue it beaten
away, wilt thou vse thy wit?

Bened. It is in my scabberd, shal I drawe it?

Prince. Doest thou weare thy wit by thy side?

Claud. Neuer any did so, though very many haue been be
side their wit, I will bid thee drawe, as wee doe the minstrels,
draw to pleasure vs.

Prince. As I am an honest man he lookes pale, art thou
sicke, or angry?

Claud. What, courage man: what though care kild a catte,
thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.

Bened. Sir, I shall meete your wit in the careere, and you
charge it against me, I pray you chuse another subiect

Claud. Nay then giue him another staffe, this last was broke
crosse.

Prince. By this light, he chaunges more and more, I thinke
he be angry indeed.

Claud. If he be, he knowes how to turne his girdle.

Bened. Shall I speake a word in your eare?

Claud. God blesse me from a challenge.

Bened. You are a villaine, I ieast not, I will make it good
howe you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare: doe
mee right, or I will protest your cowardise: you haue killd a
sweete
about Nothing.
sweeete Lady, and her death shall fall heauie on you, let me
heare from you.

Claud. Well I wil meet you, so I may haue good cheare.

Prince. What, a feast, a feast?

Claud. I faith I thanke him he hath bid me to a calues head
& a capon, the which if I doe not carue most curiously, say my
kniffe's naught, shall I not find a woodcocke too?

Bened. Sir your wit ambles well, it goes easily.

Prince. Ile tell thee how Beatrice praisd thy witte the other
day: I said thou hadst a fine witte, true said she, a fine little one:
no said I, a great wit: right saies she, a great grosse one: nay said
I, a good wit, iust said she, it hurts no body: nay said I, the gen
tleman is wise: certaine said she, a wise gentleman: nay said I, he
hath the tongues: that I beleeue said shee, for he swore a thing
to mee on munday night, which hee forswore on tuesday mor
ning, theres a double tongue theirs two tongues, thus did shee
an houre together trans-shape thy particular vertues, yet at last
she cõcluded with a sigh, thou wast the properst man in Italy.

Claud. For the which shee wept heartily and saide she ca
red not.

Prince. Yea that she did, but yet for all that, and if she did
not hate him deadly, she would loue him dearely, the old mans
daughter told vs all.

Claud. All all, and moreouer, God sawe him when he was
hid in the garden.

Prince. But when shall we set the sauage bulles hornes one
the sensible Benedicks head?

Clau. Yea and text vnder-neath, here dwells Benedick the
married man.

Bened. Fare you wel, boy, you know my minde, I wil leaue
you now to your gossep-like humor, you breake iests as brag
gards do their blades, which God be thanked hurt not: my
Lord, for your many courtisies I thanke you, I must disconti
nue your company, your brother the bastard is fled from Messina:
you haue among you, kild a sweet and innocent lady: for
my Lord Lacke-beard, there hee and I shal meet, and till then
peace be with him.
H3 Prince
Much adoe

Prince. He is in earnest.

Claudio. In most profound earnest, and ile warrant you, for
the loue of Beatrice.

Prince. And hath challengde thee.

Claudio. Most sincerely.

Prince. What a pretty thing man is, when he goes in his
dublet and hose, and leaues off his wit!

[Enter Constables, Conrade, and Borachio.]

Claudio. He is then a Giant to an Ape, but then is an Ape a
Doctor to such a man.

Prince. But soft you, let me be, plucke vp my heart, and be
sad, did he not say my brother was fled?

Cons. t. Come you sir, if iustice cannot tame you, she shall
nere weigh more reasons in her ballance, nay, and you be a
cursing hypocrite once, you must be lookt to.

Prince. How now, two of my brothers men bound? Bora
chio one.

Claudio. Hearken after their offence my Lord.

Prince. Officers, what offence haue these men done?

Cons. t. Mary sir, they haue committed false report, moreo
uer they haue spoken vntruths, secondarily they are slanders,
sixt and lastly, they haue belyed a Lady, thirdly they haue ve
refied vniust thinges, and to conclude, they are lying knaues.

Prince. First I aske thee what they haue done, thirdly I
ask thee whats their offence, sixt and lastly why they are com
mitted, and to conclude, what you lay to their charge.

Claud. Rightly reasoned, and in his owne diuision, and by
my troth theres one meaning wel suted.

Prince. Who haue you offended maisters, that you are thus
bound to your answere? this learned Constable is too cunning
to be vnderstood, whats your offence?

Bor. Sweete prince, let me goe no farther to mine answere:
do you heare me, and let this Counte kill me: I haue deceiued
euen your very eyes: what your wisedoms could not discouer,
these shallowe fooles haue broght to light, who in the night o
uerheard me confessing to this man, how Don Iohn your bro
ther incensed me to slaunder the Lady Hero, howe you were
brought
about Nothing.
brought into the orchard, and saw me court Margaret in He
roes garments, how you disgracde hir when you should marry
hir: my villany they haue vpon record, which I had rather seale
with my death, then repeate ouer to my shame: the lady is dead
vpon mine and my masters false accusation: and briefely, I de
sire nothing but the reward of a villaine.

Prince. Runnes not this speech like yron through your
bloud?

Claud. I haue dronke poison whiles he vtterd it.

Prince. But did my brother set thee on to this?

Bor. Yea, and paid me richly for the practise of it.

Prince. He is composde and framde of treacherie,
And fled he is vpon this villanie.

Clau. Sweet Hero, now thy image doth appeare
In the rare semblance that I lou'd it first.

Cons. t. Come, bring away the plaintiffes, by this time our
sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter: and ma
sters, do not forget to specifie when time and place shal serue,
that I am an asse.

Con. 2. Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the
sexton too.

[Enter Leonato, his brother, and the Sexton.]

Leonato. Which is the villaine? let me see his eies,
That when I note another man like him,
I may auoide him: which of these is he?

Bor. If you would know your wronger, looke on me.

Leonato. Art thou the slaue that with thy breath hast killd
Mine innocent child?

Bor. Yea, euen I alone.

Leo. No, not so villaine, thou beliest thy selfe,
Here stand a paire of honourable men,
A third is fled that had a hand in it:
I thanke you Princes for my daughters death,
Record it with your high and worthy deeds,
Twas brauely done, if you bethinke you of it.

Clau. I know not how to pray your pacience,
Yet I must speake, choose your reuenge your selfe,
Impose
Much adoe
Impose me to what penance your inuention
Can lay vpon my sinne, yet sinnd I not,
But in mistaking.

Prince. By my soule nor I,
And yet to satisfie this good old man,
I would bend vnder any heauy waight,
That heele enioyne me to.

Leonato. I cannot bid you bid my daughter liue,
That were impossible, but I pray you both,
Possesse the people in Messina here,
How innocent she died, and if your loue
Can labour aught in sad inuention,
Hang her an epitaph vpon her toomb,
And sing it to her bones, sing it to night:
To morrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son in law,
Be yet my nephew: my brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copie of my child thats dead,
And she alone is heyre to both of vs,
Giue her the right you should haue giu'n her cosin,
And so dies my reuenge.

Claudio. O noble sir!
Your ouer kindnesse doth wring teares from me,
I do embrace your offer and dispose,
For henceforth of poore Claudio.

Leonato. To morrow then I wil expect your comming,
To night I take my leaue, this naughty man
Shal face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I beleeue was packt in al this wrong,
Hyred to it by your brother.

Bor. No by my soule she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But alwayes hath bin iust and vertuous,
In any thing that I do know by her.

Cons. t. Moreouer sir, which indeede is not vnder white and
blacke, this plaintiffe heere, the offendour, did call me asse, I
beseech you let it be remembred in his punishment, and also
the
about Nothing.
the watch heard them talke of one Deformed, they say he
weares a key in his eare and a locke hanging by it, and borows
monie in Gods name, the which he hath vsde so long, & neuer
paied, that now men grow hard hearted and wil lend nothing
for Gods sake: praie you examine him vpon that point.

Leonato. I thanke thee for thy care and honest paines.

Cons. t. Your worship speakes like a most thankful and re
uerent youth, and I praise God for you.

Leon. Theres for thy paines.

Const. . God saue the foundation.

Leon. Goe, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thanke
thee.

Const. . I leaue an arrant knaue with your worship, which I
beseech your worship to correct your selfe, for the example of
others: God keepe your worship, I wish your worship well,
God restore you to health, I humblie giue you leaue to depart
and if a merie meeting may be wisht, God prohibite it: come
neighbour.

Leon. Vntill to morrow morning, Lords, farewell.

Brot. Farewell my lords, we looke for you to morrow.

Prince. We will not faile.

Claud. To night ile mourne with Hero.

Leonato. Bring you these fellowes on, weel talke with Mar
garet, how her acquaintance grew with this lewd felow.

[exeunt]

