
[Enter Leonato, his brother, his wife, Hero his daughter, and]


[Beatrice his neece, and a kinsman.]

Leonato. Was not counte Iohn here at supper?

brother. I saw him not.

Beatrice. How tartely that gentleman lookes, I neuer can see
him but I am heart-burn'd an hower after.

Hero. He is of a very melancholy disposition.

Beatrice. He were an excellent man that were made iust in
the mid-way between him and Benedick, the one is too like an
image and saies nothing, and the other too like my ladies eldest
sonne, euermore tatling.

Leonato. Then halfe signior Benedickes tongue in Counte
Iohns mouth, and halfe Counte Iohns melancholy in Signior
Benedickes face.

Beatrice. With a good legge and a good foote vnckle, and
money inough in his purse, such a man would winne any wo
man in the world if a could get her good will.

Leonato. By my troth neece thou wilt neuer get thee a hus
band, if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.

brother. Infaith shees too curst.

Beatrice. Too curst is more then curst, I shall lessen
B3 Gods
Much adoe
Gods sending that way, for it is saide, God sends a curst cow
short hornes, but to a cow too curst, he sends none.

Leonato. So, by being too curst, God will send you no
hornes.

Beatrice. Iust, if he send me no husband, for the which bles
sing, I am at him vpon my knees euery morning and euening:
Lord, I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face, I
had rather lie in the woollen!

Leonato. You may light on a husband that hath no beard.

Beatrice. What should I do with him, dresse him in my ap
parell and make him my waiting gentlewoman? he that hath a
beard, is more then a youth: and he that hath no beard, is lesse
then a man: and he that is more then a youth, is not for me, and
he that is lesse then a man, I am not for him, therefore I will
euen take sixpence in earnest of the Berrord, and leade his
apes into hell.

Leonato. Well then, go you into hell.

Beatrice. No but to the gate, and there will the diuell meete
me like an old cuckold with hornes on his head, and say, get
you to heauen Beatrice, get you to heauen, heeres no place for
you maids, so deliuer I vp my apes and away to saint Peter: for
the heauens, he shewes me where the Batchellers sit, and there
liue we as mery as the day is long.

brother. Well neece, I trust you will be rulde by your fa
ther.

Beatrice. Yes faith, it is my cosens duetie to make cursie and
say, father, as it please you: but yet for all that cosin, let him be a
handsome fellow, or else make an other cursie, and say, father,
as it please me.

Leonato. Well neece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a
husband.

Beatrice. Not til God make men of some other mettal then
earth, would it not grieue a woman to be ouer-masterd with
a peece of valiant dust? to make an account of her life to a clod
of waiward marle? no vnckle, ile none: Adams sonnes are my
brethren, and truely I holde it a sinne to match in my kin
red.
Leonato
about Nothing.

Leonato. Daughter, remember what I told you, if the prince
do solicite you in that kind, you know your answer.

Beatrice. The fault will be in the musique cosin, if you be
not wooed in good time: if the prince be too important, tell
him there is measure in euery thing, and so daunce out the an
swer, for here me Hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting, is
as a Scotch ijgge, a measure, and a cinquepace: the first suite is
hot and hasty like a Scotch ijgge (and ful as fantasticall) the
wedding manerly modest (as a measure) full of state and aun
chentry, and then comes Repentance, and with his bad legs
falls into the cinquepace faster and faster, til he sincke into his
graue.

Leonato. Cosin you apprehend passing shrewdly.

Beatrice. I haue a good eie vnckle, I can see a church by
day-light.

Leonato. The reuellers are entring brother, make good
roome.

[Enter prince, Pedro, Claudio, and Benedicke, and Balthaser,]


[or dumb Iohn.]

Pedro. Lady will you walke about with your friend?

Hero. So, you walke softly, and looke sweetly, and say no
thing, I am yours for the walke, and especially when I walk a
way.

Pedro. With me in your company.

Hero. I may say so when I please.

Pedro. And when please you to say so?

Hero. When I like your fauour, for God defend the lute
should be like the case.

Pedro. My visor is Philemons roofe, within the house is
Ioue.

Hero. Why then your visor should be thatcht.

Pedro. Speake low if you speake loue.

Bene. Well, I would you did like me.

Mar. So would not I for your owne sake, for I haue ma
ny ill qualities.

Bene. Which is one?

Mar. I say my praiers alowd.
B4 Bene.
Much adoe

Bene. I loue you the better, the hearers may cry Amen.

Marg. God match me with a good dauncer.

Balth. Amen.

Marg. And God keepe him out of my sight when the
daunce is done: answer Clarke.

Balth. No more words, the Clarke is answered.

Vrs. ula I know you well enough, you are signior Antho
nio.

Antho. At a word I am not.

Vrs. ula I knowe you by the wagling of your head.

Antho. To tell you true, I counterfeit him.

Vrs. ula You coulde neuer doe him so ill well, vnlesse you
were the very man: heeres his drie hand vp and downe, you
are he, you are he.

Antho. At a word, I am not.

Vrs. ula Come, come, do you thinke I do not know you by
your excellent wit? can vertue hide it selfe? go to, mumme, you
are he, graces will appeere, and theres an end.

Beat. Will you not tell me who tolde you so?

Bened. No, you shall pardon me.

Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you are?

Bened. Not now.

Beat. That I was disdainefull, and that I had my good wit
out of the hundred mery tales: wel, this was signior Benedick
that said so.

Bened. Whats he?

Beat. I am sure you know him well enough.

Bened. Not I, beleeue me.

Beat. Did he neuer make you laugh?

Bened. I pray you what is he?

Beat. Why he is the princes ieaster, a very dul fool, only his
gift is, in deuising impossible slaunders, none but Libertines
delight in him, and the commendation is not in his wit, but in
his villanie, for he both pleases men and angers them, and then
they laugh at him, and beate him: I am sure he is in the Fleete,
I would he had boorded me.

Bene. When I know the Gentleman, ile tell him what you
say.
Beat.
about Nothing.

Beat. Do, do, heele but break a comparison or two on me,
which peraduẽture, (not markt, or not laught at) strikes him in
to melancholy, and then theres a partrige wing saued, for the
foole will eate no supper that night: wee must follow the lea
ders.

Bene. In euery good thing.

Beat. Nay, if they leade to any ill, I will leaue them at the
next turning. Dance exeunt

Iohn. Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath with
drawne her father to breake with him about it: the Ladies fo
low her, and but one visor remaines.

Borachio. And that is Claudio, I knowe him by his bear
ing.

Iohn. Are not you signior Benedicke?

Clau. You know me well, I am he.

Iohn. Signior, you are very neere my brother in his loue, he
is enamourd on Hero, I pray you disswade him from her, she
is no equall for his birth, you may doe the parte of an honest
man in it.

Claudio. How know you he loues her?

Iohn. I heard him sweare his affection.

Borac. So did I too, and he swore hee would marry her to
night.

Iohn. Come let vs to the banquet.

[exeunt: manet Clau.]

Claud. Thus answer I in name of Benedicke,
But heare these ill newes with the eares of Claudio:
Tis certaine so, the Prince wooes for himselfe,
Friendship is constant in all other things,
Saue in the office and affaires of loue:
Therefore all hearts in loue vse their owne tongues.
Let euery eie negotiate for it selfe,
And trust no Agent: for Beauty is a witch,
Against whose charmes, faith melteth into blood:
This is an accident of hourely proofe,
Which I mistrusted not: farewel therefore Hero.

[Enter Bene ( dicke]

Benedicke. Count Claudio.

Claudio. Yea, the same.
C Bene.
Much adoe

Bene. Come, will you go with me?

Claudio. Whither?

Bene. Euen to the next willow, about your owne busines,
county: what fashion will you weare the garland of? about
your necke, like an Vsurers chaine? or vnder your arme, like a
Lieutenants scarffe? you must weare it one way, for the prince
hath got your Hero.

Claudio. I wish him ioy of her.

Bened. Why thats spoken like an honest Drouier, so they
sell bullockes: but did you thinke the Prince would haue ser
ued you thus?

Claudio. I pray you leaue me.

Benedicke. Ho now you strike like the blindman, twas the
boy that stole your meate, and youle beate the post.

Claudio. If it will not be, ile leaue you. exit

Benedicke. Alas poore hurt foule, now will hee creepe into
sedges: but that my Ladie Beatrice should know me, and not
know mee: the princes foole! hah, it may be I goe vnder that
title because I am merry: yea but so I am apte to doe my selfe
wrong: I am not so reputed, it is the base (though bitter) dispo
sition of Beatrice, that puts the world into her person, and so
giues me out: well, ile be reuenged as I may.

[Enter the Prince, Hero, Leonato, Iohn and Borachio,]


[and Conrade.]

Pedro. Now signior, wheres the Counte, did you see him?

Benedicke. Troth my lord, I haue played the part of Ladie
Fame, I found him heere as melancholy as a Lodge in a War
ren, I tolde him, and I thinke I tolde him true, that your grace
had got the goodwil of this yoong Lady, and I offred him my
company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as be
ing forsaken, or to binde him vp a rod, as being worthie to bee
whipt.

Pedro. To be whipt, whats his fault?

Benedicke. The flatte transgression of a Schoole-boy, who
being ouer-ioyed with finding a birds nest, shewes it his com
panion, and he steales it.

Pedro. Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? the transgres
sion
about Nothing.
sion is in the stealer.

Benedicke. Yet it had not beene amisse the rodde had beene
made, & the garland too, for the garland he might haue worn
himselfe, and the rodde he might haue bestowed on you, who
(as I take it) haue stolne his birds nest.

Pedro. I wil but teach them to sing, and restore them to the
owner.

Benedicke. If their singing answer your saying, by my faith
you say honestly.

Pedro. The ladie Beatrice hath a quarrell to you, the Gen
tleman that daunst with her, told her shee is much wrongd by
you.

Bened. O shee misusde me past the indurance of a blocke:
an oake but with one greene leafe on it, would haue answered
her: my very visor beganne to assume life, and scold with her:
she tolde me, not thinking I had beene my selfe, that I was the
Princes iester, that I was duller than a great thawe, huddleing
iest vpon iest, with such impossible conueiance vpon me, that
I stoode like a man at a marke, with a whole army shooting
at me: she speakes poynyards, and euery word stabbes: if her
breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no liu
ing neere her, shee would infect to the north starre: I woulde
not marry her, though shee were indowed with al that Adam
had left him before he transgrest, she would haue made Her
cules haue turnd spit, yea, and haue cleft his club to make the
fire too: come, talke not of her, you shall find her the infernall
Ate in good apparell, I would to God some scholler woulde
coniure her, for certainely, while she is heere, a man may liue
as quiet in hell, as in a sanctuarie, and people sinne vpon pur
pose, because they would goe thither, so indeede all disquiet,
horrour, and perturbation followes her.

[Enter Claudio and Beatrice.]

Pedro. Looke heere she comes.

Benedicke. Will your grace command me any seruice to the
worldes end? I will go on the slightest arrand now to the An
typodes that you can deuise to send mee on: I will fetch you a
tooth-picker now from the furthest inch of Asia: bring you
C2 the
Much adoe
the length of Prester Iohns foot: fetch you a haire off the great
Chams beard: doe you any embassage to the Pigmies, rather
than holde three words conference, with this harpy, you haue
no imployment for me?

Pedro. None, but to desire your good company.

Benedicke. O God sir, heeres a dish I loue not, I cannot in
dure my Ladie Tongue. exit.

Pedro. Come Lady, come, you haue lost the heart of signi
or Benedicke.

Beatrice. Indeed my Lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gaue
him vse for it, a double heart for his single one, mary once be
fore he wonne it of me, with false dice, therefore your grace
may well say I haue lost it.

Pedro. You haue put him downe Lady, you haue put him
downe.

Beatrice. So I would not he should do me, my Lord, lest I
should prooue the mother of fooles: I haue brought Counte
Claudio, whom you sent me to seeke.

Pedro. Why how now Counte, wherefore are you sad?

Claudio. Not sad my Lord.

Pedro. How then? sicke?

Claudio. Neither, my Lord.

Beatrice. The Counte is neither sad, nor sicke, nor merry,
nor well: but ciuill Counte, ciuil as an orange, and something
of that iealous complexion.

Pedro. Ifaith Lady, I think your blazon to be true, though
ile be sworne, if he be so, his conceit is false: heere Claudio, I
haue wooed in thy name, and faire Hero is won, I haue broke
with her father, and his good will obtained, name the day of
marriage, and God giue thee ioy.

Leonato. Counte take of me my daughter, and with her my
fortunes: his grace hath made the match, and all grace say A
men to it.

Beatrice. Speake Counte, tis your Qu.

Claudio. Silence is the perfectest
Herault of ioy, I were but
little happy if I could say, how much? Lady, as you are mine,
I am yours, I giue away my selfe for you, and doate vpon the
exchange.
Beatr.
about Nothing.

Beat. Speake cosin, or (if you cannot) stop his mouth with a
kisse, and let not him speake neither.

Pedro. Infaith lady you haue a merry heart.

Beatr. Yea my lord I thanke it, poore foole it keepes on the
windy side of Care, my coosin tells him in his eare that he is in
her heart

Clau. And so she doth coosin.

Beat. Good Lord for aliance: thus goes euery one to the
world but I, and I am sun-burnt, I may sit in a corner and crie,
heigh ho for a husband.

Pedro. Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.

Beat. I would rather haue one of your fathers getting: hath
your grace ne're a brother like you? your father got excellent
husbands if a maide coulde come by them.

Prince. Will you haue me? lady.

Beatr. No my lord, vnles I might haue another for work
ing-daies, your grace is too costly to weare euery day: but I
beseech your grace pardon me, I was born to speake all mirth,
and no matter.

Prince. Your silence most offends me, and to be merry, best
becomes you, for out a question, you were borne in a merry
hower.

Beatr. No sure my lord, my mother cried, but then there
was a starre daunst, and vnder that was I borne, cosins God
giue you ioy.

Leonato. Neece, will you looke to those things I tolde you
of?

Beat. I crie you mercy vncle, by your graces pardon.

[exit Beatrice.]

Prince. By my troth a pleasant spirited lady.

Leon. Theres little of the melancholy element in her my
lord, she is neuer sad, but when she sleeps, & not euer sad then:
for I haue heard my daughter say, she hath often dreampt of
vnhappines, and wakt her selfe with laughing.

Pedro. She cannot indure to heare tell of a husband.

Leonato. O by no meanes, she mockes al her wooers out of
sute.
C3 Prince
Much adoe

Prince. She were an excellent wife for Benedick.

Leonato. O Lord, my lord, if they were but a weeke married,
they would talke themselues madde.

Prince. Countie Claudio, when meane you to goe to
church?

Clau. To morow my lord, Time goes on crutches, til Loue
haue all his rites.

Leonato. Not til monday, my deare sonne, which is hence a
iust seuennight, and a time too briefe too, to haue al things an
swer my mind.

Prince. Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing,
but I warrant thee Claudio, the time shall not go dully by vs, I
wil in the interim, vndertake one of Hercules labors, which is,
to bring Signior Benedick and the lady Beatrice into a moun
taine of affection, th'one with th'other, I would faine haue it a
match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but
minister such assistance as I shall giue you direction.

Leonato. My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights
watchings.

Claud. And I my Lord.

Prince. And you too gentle Hero?

Hero. I wil do any modest office, my lord, to help my cosin
to a good husband.

Prince. And Benedicke is not the vnhopefullest husband
that I know: thus farre can I praise him, he is of a noble strain,
of approoued valour, and confirmde honesty, I will teach you
how to humour your cosin, that she shall fal in loue with Be
nedicke, and I, with your two helpes, wil so practise on Bene
dicke, that in dispight of his quicke wit, and his queasie sto
macke, he shall fall in loue with Beatrice: if we can do this, Cu
pid is no longer an Archer, his glory shall bee ours, for we are
the onely loue-gods, goe in with mee, and I will tell you my
drift. exit.
